It's one o'clock boy is't not
It hath struck.
These should be hours fornecessities,
Not for delights;
times to repair our naturewith comforting repose,
and not for us to wastethese times.
Good hour of night, SirThomas!
Whither so late?
Came you from the king, mylord
I did, Sir Thomas: andleft him at primero
With the Duke of Suffolk.
I must to him too, beforehe go to bed.
I'll take my leave.
Not yet, Sir ThomasLovell.
What's the matter? Itseems you are in haste:
an if there be no greatoffence belongs to't,
give your friend some touchof your late business:
affairs, that walk, asthey say spirits do,
at midnight, have in thema wilder nature
than the business thatseeks dispatch by day.
My lord, I love you;
And durst commend a secretto your ear
Much weightier than thiswork.
The queen's in labour,
They say, in greatextremity;
and fear'd she'll with thelabour end.
The fruit she goes with Ipray for heartily,
that it may find goodtime, and live:
but for the stock, SirThomas,
I wish it grubb'd up now.
Methinks I could cry theamen; and yet
my conscience says she's agood creature,
and, sweet lady,
does deserve our betterwishes.
But, sir, sir,
Hear me, Sir Thomas:
you're a gentleman of mineown way;
I know you wise,religious;
And, let me tell you,
it will ne'er be well,
'Twill not, Sir ThomasLovell, take't of me,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell,her two hands, and she,
Sleep in their graves.
Now, sir, you speak oftwo
the most remark'd i' thekingdom.
As for Cromwell, besidethat of the jewel house,
is made master o' therolls,
and the king's secretary;further, sir,
Stands in the gap andtrade of moe preferments,
With which the time willload him.
The archbishop is theking's hand and tongue;
and who dare speak onesyllable against him?
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas;
There are that dare;
and I myself have venturedto speak my mind of him:
and indeed this day, Sir,I may tell it you,
I think I have incensedthe lords o' the council,
that he is, For so I knowhe is, they know he is,
A most arch heretic,
a pestilence that doesinfect the land:
with which they moved havebroken with the king;
who hath so far given earto our complaint,
of his great grace andprincely care
foreseeing those fellmischiefs
Our reasons laid beforehim,
hath commanded to-morrowmorning
to the council-board he beconvented.
He's a rank weed, SirThomas,
And we must root him out.
From your affairs I hinderyou too long:
good night, Sir Thomas.
Many good nights, my lord:I rest your servant.
Charles, I will play nomore tonight;
My mind's not on't; youare too hard for me.
Sir, I did never win ofyou before.
But little, Charles; norshall not,
when my fancy's on myplay.
Now, Lovell, from thequeen what is the news?
I could not personallydeliver to her
What you commanded me,
but by her woman I sentyour message;
who return'd her thanks inthe great'st humbleness,
and desired your highness mostheartily to pray for her.
What say'st thou, ha?
To pray for her? what, isshe crying out?
So said her woman
and that her sufferancemade
Almost each pang a death.
Alas, good lady!
God safely quit her of herburthen,
and with gentle travail,
to the gladding of yourhighness with an heir!
'Tis midnight, Charles;
Prithee, to bed; and inthy prayers
remember the estate of mypoor queen.
Leave me alone;
For I must think of thatwhich company
Would not be friendly to.
I wish your highness aquiet night;
and my good mistress willremember in my prayers.
Charles, good night.
Well, sir, what follows?
Sir, I have brought mylord the archbishop,
As you commanded me.
Ha! Canterbury?
Ay, my good lord.
'Tis true: where is he,Guilford?
He attends your highness'pleasure.
Bring him to us. Avoid thegallery.
Ha! I have said. Be gone.What!
How now, my lord! youdesire to know
Wherefore I sent for you.
It is my duty to attendyour highness' pleasure.
Pray you, arise,
My good and gracious Lordof Canterbury.
Come, you and I must walka turn together;
I have news to tell you:
come, come, give me yourhand.
Ah, my good lord, I grieveat what I speak,
And am right sorry torepeat what follows
I have, and mostunwillingly,
of late heard many grievous,I do say, my lord,
Grievous complaints ofyou;
which, being consider'd,
Have moved us and ourcouncil,
that you shall thismorning come before us;
where, I know,
You cannot with suchfreedom purge yourself,
But that, till furthertrial in those charges
Which will require youranswer,
you must take yourpatience to you,
and be well contented tomake your house our Tower:
you a brother of us,
It fits we thus proceed,
or else no witness wouldcome against you.
I humbly thank yourhighness;
And am right glad to catchthis good occasion
Most throughly to bewinnow'd,
where my chaff and cornshall fly asunder:
for, I know,
there's none stands undermore calumnious tongues
Than I myself, poor man.
Stand up, good Canterbury:
Thy truth and thyintegrity
is rooted in us, thyfriend:
give me thy hand, standup:
Prithee, let's walk.
Now, by my holidame. Whatmanner of man are you?
My lord, I look'd youwould have
given me your petition,
that I should have ta'ensome pains
to bring together yourselfand your accusers;
and to have heard you,
Without indurance,further.
Most dread liege,
The good I stand on is mytruth and honesty:
If they shall fail, I,with mine enemies,
Will triumph o'er myperson;
which I weigh not, beingof those virtues vacant.
I fear nothing what can besaid against me.
Know you not how yourstate stands i' the world,
with the whole world?
Your enemies are many, andnot small;
their practises must bearthe same proportion;
and not ever the justice andthe truth o' the question
carries the due o' theverdict with it:
at what ease might corruptminds
procure knaves as corrupt
To swear against you? suchthings have been done.
You are potently opposed;
and with a malice of asgreat size.
Ween you of better luck,
I mean, in perjuredwitness, than your master,
Whose minister you are,
whiles here he lived uponthis naughty earth?
Go to, go to;
You take a precipice forno leap of danger,
And woo your owndestruction.
God and your majestyprotect mine innocence,
or I fall into the trap islaid for me!
Be of good cheer;
They shall no more prevailthan we give way to.
Keep comfort to you;
and this morning see youdo appear before them:
if they shall chance, incharging you with matters,
to commit you,
The best persuasions to thecontrary fail not to use,
and with what vehemency
the occasion shallinstruct you:
if entreaties will renderyou no remedy,
this ring deliver them,
and your appeal to usthere make before them.
Look, the good man weeps!
He's honest, on minehonour.
God's blest mother!
I swear he istrue--hearted;
and a soul none better inmy kingdom.
Get you gone, and do as Ihave bid you.
He has strangled hislanguage in his tears.
Come back: what mean you?
I'll not come back;
the tidings that I bring willmake my boldness manners.
Now, good angels fly o'erthy royal head,
and shade thy person undertheir blessed wings!
Now, by thy looks I guessthy message.
Is the queen deliver'd?
Say, ay; and of a boy.
Ay, ay, my liege; and of alovely boy:
the God of heaven both nowand ever bless her!
'tis a girl, promises boyshereafter.
Sir, your queen desiresyour visitation,
and to be acquainted withthis stranger
'tis as like you as cherryis to cherry.
Lovell!
Sir?
Give her an hundred marks.I'll to the queen.
An hundred marks! By thislight, I'll ha' more.
An ordinary groom is forsuch payment.
I will have more, or scoldit out of him.
Said I for this, the girlwas like to him?
I will have more, or elseunsay't;
and now, while it is hot,I'll put it to the issue.
I hope I am not too late;
and yet the gentleman,
that was sent to me fromthe council,
pray'd me to make greathaste.
All fast? what means this?
Ho! Who waits there?
Sure, you know me?
Yes, my lord; But yet Icannot help you.
Why?
Your grace must wait tillyou be call'd for.
So.
This is a piece of malice.
I am glad I came this wayso happily:
the king shall understandit presently.
'Tis Butts, the king'sphysician:
as he pass'd along,
How earnestly he cast hiseyes upon me!
Pray heaven, he sound notmy disgrace!
For certain, this is ofpurpose
laid by some that hate meGod turn their hearts!
I never sought theirmalice
To quench mine honour:
they would shame to makeme wait else at door,
a fellow-counsellor,
'Mong boys, grooms, andlackeys.
But their pleasures mustbe fulfill'd,
and I attend withpatience.
I'll show your grace thestrangest sight
What's that, Butts?
I think your highness sawthis many a day.
Body o' me, where is it?
There, my lord:
The high promotion of hisgrace of Canterbury;
Who holds his state atdoor, 'mongst pursuivants,
Pages, and footboys.
Ha! 'tis he, indeed:
Is this the honour they doone another?
'Tis well there's oneabove 'em yet.
I had thought they hadparted
so much honesty among 'em
At least, good manners,
as not thus to suffer aman of his place,
and so near our favour,
To dance attendance ontheir lordships' pleasures,
And at the door too, likea post with packets.
By holy Mary, Butts,there's knavery:
Speak to the business,master-secretary:
Why are we met in council?
Please your honours,
The chief cause concernshis grace of Canterbury.
Has he had knowledge ofit?
Yes.
Who waits there?
Without, my noble lords?
Yes.
My lord archbishop;
And has done half an hour,to know your pleasures.
Let him come in.
Your grace may enter now.
My good lord archbishop,
I'm very sorry to sit hereat this present,
and behold that chairstand empty:
but we all are men,
In our own natures frail,
and capable of our flesh;few are angels:
out of which frailty andwant of wisdom,
you, that best shouldteach us,
Have misdemean'd yourself,and not a little,
Toward the king first,then his laws,
in filling the wholerealm, by your teaching
and your chaplains,
For so we are inform'd,with new opinions,
Divers and dangerous;which are heresies,
And, not reform'd, mayprove pernicious.
Which reformation
must be sudden too, mynoble lords;
for those that tame wildhorses
Pace 'em not in theirhands to make 'em gentle,
But stop their mouths withstubborn bits, and spur 'em,
Till they obey the manage.
If we suffer,
Out of our easiness andchildish pity
To one man's honour, thiscontagious sickness,
Farewell all physic:
and what follows then?
Commotions, uproars,
with a general taint ofthe whole state:
as, of late days, ourneighbours,
The upper Germany, candearly witness,
Yet freshly pitied in ourmemories.
My good lords,
hitherto, in all theprogress
Both of my life andoffice,
I have labour'd,
And with no little study,
that my teaching and thestrong course
of my authority might goone way,
and safely; and the endwas ever, to do well:
nor is there living,
I speak it with a singleheart, my lords,
A man that more detests,more stirs against,
Both in his privateconscience and his place,
Defacers of a publicpeace, than I do.
Pray heaven, the king maynever find a heart
With less allegiance init!
Men that make envy andcrooked malice nourishment
Dare bite the best.
I do beseech yourlordships,
That, in this case ofjustice,
my accusers, be what theywill,
may stand forth face toface,
And freely urge againstme.
Nay, my lord, that cannotbe:
you are a counsellor,
And, by that virtue, noman dare accuse you.
My lord, because we havebusiness of more moment,
We will be short with you.
'Tis his highness'pleasure,
And our consent, forbetter trial of you,
From hence you becommitted to the Tower;
Where, being but a privateman again,
You shall know many dareaccuse you boldly,
More than, I fear, you areprovided for.
Ah, my good Lord ofWinchester, I thank you;
You are always my goodfriend;
if your will pass,
I shall both find yourlordship judge and juror,
You are so merciful:
I see your end;
'Tis my undoing:
love and meekness, lord,
Become a churchman betterthan ambition:
Win straying souls withmodesty again,
Cast none away.
That I shall clear myself,
Lay all the weight ye canupon my patience,
I make as little doubt,
as you do conscienceindoing daily wrongs.
I could say more,
But reverence to yourcalling makes me modest.
My lord, my lord, you area sectary,
That's the plain truth:
your painted glossdiscovers,
To men that understandyou, words and weakness.
My Lord of Winchester, youare a little,
By your good favour, toosharp;
men so noble, howeverfaulty,
yet should find respect
For what they have been:
'tis a cruelty to load afalling man.
Good master secretary,
I cry your honour mercy;
you may, worst of all thistable, say so.
Why, my lord?
Do not I know you for afavourer
Of this new sect?
ye are not sound.
Not sound?
Not sound, I say.
Would you were half sohonest!
Men's prayers then wouldseek you, not their fears.
I shall remember this boldlanguage.
Do. Remember your boldlife too.
This is too much;
Forbear, for shame, mylords.
I have done.
And I.
Then thus for you, mylord:
it stands agreed, I takeit, by all voices,
that forthwith you beconvey'd to the Tower
a prisoner;
There to remain till theking's further pleasure
Be known unto us:
are you all agreed, lords?
We are.
Is there no other way ofmercy,
But I must needs to theTower, my lords?
What other would youexpect?
you are strangelytroublesome.
Let some o' the guard beready there.
For me? Must I go like atraitor thither?
Receive him, and see himsafe i' the Tower.
Stay,
good my lords, I have alittle yet to say.
Look there, my lords;
By virtue of that ring,
I take my cause out of thegripes of cruel men,
and give it to a mostnoble judge,
the king my master.
This is the king's ring.
'Tis no counterfeit.
'Tis the right ring,
by heaven: I told ye all,
When ye first put thisdangerous stone a-rolling,
'Twould fall uponourselves.
Do you think, my lords,
The king will suffer
but the little finger ofthis man to be vex'd?
'Tis now too certain:
How much more is his lifein value with him?
Would I were fairly outon't!
My mind gave me, inseeking tales
and informations againstthis man,
whose honesty the deviland his disciples
only envy at,
Ye blew the fire thatburns ye:
now have at ye!
Dread sovereign,
how much are we bound toheaven
In daily thanks, that gaveus such a prince;
Not only good and wise,but most religious:
One that, in all obedience,makes the church
The chief aim of hishonour;
and, to strengthen thatholy duty,
out of dear respect, hisroyal self in judgment
comes to hear the cause
betwixt her and this greatoffender.
You were ever good atsudden commendations,
Bishop of Winchester.
But know,
I come not to hear suchflattery now,
and in my presence;
They are too thin and bareto hide offences.
To me you cannot reach,you play the spaniel,
And think with wagging ofyour tongue to win me;
But, whatsoe'er thoutakest me for,
I'm sure thou hast a cruelnature and a bloody.
Good man, sit down.
Now let me see the proudesthe, that dares most,
but wag his finger atthee:
By all that's holy,
he had better starve
Than but once think thisplace becomes thee not.
May it please your grace,
No, sir, it does notplease me.
I had thought I had hadmen
of some understanding andwisdom of my council;
but I find none.
Was it discretion, lords,to let this man,
This good man,--few of youdeserve that title,--
This honest man,
wait like a lousy footboyAt chamberdoor?
and one as great as youare?
Why, what a shame wasthis!
Did my commission bid yeso far forget yourselves?
I gave ye power as he wasa counsellor to try him,
Not as a groom:
there's some of ye, I see,
More out of malice thanintegrity,
Would try him to theutmost, had ye mean;
Which ye shall never havewhile I live.
Thus far, my most dreadsovereign,
may it like your grace tolet my tongue excuse all.
What was purposed concerninghis imprisonment,
was rather, if there befaith in men,
meant for his trial, andfair purgation to the world,
than malice, I'm sure, inme.
Well, well, my lords,respect him;
Take him, and use himwell, he's worthy of it.
I will say thus much forhim,
if a prince may bebeholding to a subject,
I am, for his love andservice, so to him.
Make me no more ado, butall embrace him:
Be friends, for shame, mylords!
My Lord of Canterbury,
I have a suit which youmust not deny me;
That is, a fair young maid
that yet wants baptism,
You must be godfather, andanswer for her.
The greatest monarch nowalive may glory
In such an honour:
how may I deserve it
That am a poor and humblesubject to you?
Come, come, my lord,you'ld spare your spoons:
you shall have two noblepartners with you;
the old Duchess of Norfolk,and Lady Marquess Dorset:
will these please you?
Once more, my Lord ofWinchester, I charge you,
Embrace and love this man.
With a true heart
And brother-love I do it.
And let heaven witness,
how dear I hold thisconfirmation.
Good man, those joyfultears show thy true heart:
The common voice, I see,
is verified of thee, whichsays thus,
'Do my Lord of Canterburya shrewd turn,
and he is your friend forever.'
Come, lords, we trifletime away;
I long to have this youngone made a Christian.
As I have made ye one,lords, one remain;
So I grow stronger, youmore honour gain.
Heaven, from thy endlessgoodness,
send prosperous life,long, and ever happy,
to the high and mightyprincess of England,
Elizabeth!
And to your royal grace,and the good queen,
My noble partners, andmyself, thus pray:
All comfort, joy, in thismost gracious lady,
Heaven ever laid up tomake parents happy,
May hourly fall upon ye!
Thank you, good lordarchbishop:
What is her name?
Elizabeth.
Stand up, lord.
With this kiss take myblessing:
God protect thee! Intowhose hand I give thy life.
Amen.
My noble gossips, ye havebeen too prodigal:
I thank ye heartily; soshall this lady,
When she has so muchEnglish.
Let me speak, sir,
For heaven now bids me;
and the words I utter letnone think flattery,
for they'll find 'emtruth.
This royal infant--heavenstill move about her!--
Though in her cradle,
yet now promises upon thisland
a thousand thousandblessings,
Which time shall bring toripeness:
she shall be--
but few now living canbehold that goodness--
A pattern to all princesliving with her,
And all that shallsucceed:
Saba was never morecovetous of wisdom
and fair virtue
Than this pure soulshall be:
all princely graces,
That mould up such amighty piece as this is,
With all the virtues thatattend the good,
Shall still be doubled onher:
truth shall nurse her,
Holy and heavenly thoughtsstill counsel her:
She shall be loved andfear'd:
her own shall bless her;
Her foes shake like afield of beaten corn,
And hang their heads withsorrow:
good grows with her:
In her days every manshall eat in safety,
Under his own vine, whathe plants;
and sing the merry songs ofpeace to all his neighbours:
God shall be truly known;
and those about her
from her shall read theperfect ways of honour,
And by those claim theirgreatness,
not by blood.
Nor shall this peace sleepwith her:
but as when the bird ofwonder dies,
the maiden phoenix,
Her ashes new createanother heir,
As great in admiration asherself;
So shall she leave herblessedness to one,
When heaven shall call her
from this cloud ofdarkness,
Who from the sacred ashesof her honour
Shall star-like rise, asgreat in fame as she was,
And so stand fix'd:
peace, plenty, love,truth, terror,
That were the servants tothis chosen infant,
Shall then be his, andlike a vine grow to him:
Wherever the bright sun ofheaven shall shine,
His honour and thegreatness of his name
Shall be, and make newnations:
he shall flourish,
And, like a mountaincedar,
reach his branches to allthe plains about him:
our children's childrenshall see this,
and bless heaven.
Thou speakest wonders.
She shall be, to thehappiness of England,
An aged princess;
many days shall see her,
And yet no day without adeed to crown it.
Would I had known nomore!
but she must die,
She must, the saints musthave her; yet a virgin,
A most unspotted lilyshall she pass
To the ground,
and all the world shallmourn her.
O lord archbishop,
Thou hast made me now aman!
never, before this happychild, did I get any thing:
This oracle of comfort hasso pleased me,
That when I am in heaven
I shall desire to see whatthis child does,
and praise my Maker.
I thank ye all.
To you, my good lordmayor,
And your good brethren,
I am much beholding;
I have received muchhonour by your presence,
And ye shall find methankful.
Lead the way, lords:
Ye must all see the queen,and she must thank ye,
She will be sick else.
This day, no man think hasbusiness at his house;
for all shall stay:
This little one shall makeit holiday.